This is a list of some of the larger features I would like to see added to Whisper.Some of these I will implement sooner or later. For some of the others I doubt ifI will ever find the time. (There's also a Notes.txt file which is a sort of dailytodo list).I think it would be great to get some help on these (or things not on the list) from other people. If you decide to do this there are a few things I ask:1) Please follow the naming conventions listed in "Naming Conventions.txt". Other thanthat you're essentially free to organize the code as you see fit.2) The code can't have a very stringent copyright. For example, I won't accept copyleftedcode, unless perhaps, it's an optional package.3) I reserve the right to refuse to add submissions. * I plan on adding the basic controls (push button, check box, radio button, group box,static text, editable text, divider line, and probably popup menu/combo box) but thereare a lot more controls that I won't get around to for quite a while. * At some point support for printing should be added.* I'd like to add a view editor. Raven has one which should make it easier to write the second time. One thing that I'd like to do differently is use XML to stream the views in and out. This would make it much easier to handle changes in the data streamed out by the views and to handle custom user data. XML's DTDs may also allow for the view editor dialogsto be generated at runtime which would be very sweet. One open question is how to handle localization. One possibility is to handle this likeLoadAppString: a different resource is loaded depending on the current locale. This wouldgive very good results, but it's clumsy and makes localization more difficult. A moreinteresting possibility is to call LoadAppString when the control is loaded and rely ona layout manager to tweak the layout as appropiate. This would make localization very easyand should still give good results (right?).* Support for view layout managers would be nice.* Scripting? Mac only? Visual Basic?* Linux support?